##Chapter 7: Conclusion##

Retellings of Ancient Greek epics offer a wealthy of multiformity and intertextuality. The take the original epic, and divide it into smaller, workable units. These units, or episodes, are often based around major characters, geography, or significant events. A comparison across various retellings reveals the way different authors and even genres expand and contract these episodes. Certain sources can add smaller elements to an episode, or gloss over others. However, there are essential elements that must always be present in order to make a given episode recognizable to the reader. Even highly contracted episodes can evoke great meaning for a traditional audience. The retellings that I have analyzed are varied in their length, genre, and even their medium. The authors' goals and preferences play heavily on each individual retellings. 

Proclus is often taken as a highly authoritative source for the Epic Cycle. In the majority of his summaries of these epics, he employs certain phrases in order to signal a change in episode. His retelling does not offer any alternate traditions, but rather continues through the narrative span of the Cycle. However, Proclus does not retell the extant Homeric Epics, the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, and this impacts his retelling. He works to fit his summaries around these already well-known poems, and therefore makes sure to set the narrative groundwork that leads to each poem's action. Proclus often shows the heroes in a more positive light. When they commit treacherous acts in other retellings, Proclus moderates the offense or treats it passively. This may be part of a certain reverence on his part towards such celebrated heroes. 

The *Library* of Apollodorus is a continuous retelling that seeks to cover all of Greek mythology. His text does not contain episodic divisions, let alone breaks between different epics in his Cycle passages. Because his text is not broken down into individual epics, as is the text of Proclus, it can be difficult to place an element that is on the border of two epics firmly in one or the other. In further contrast to Proclus, Apollodorus does include a retelling of the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*. Therefore, he does not need to set up the action of the Homeric epics as explicitly as other retellings. If Proclus tempers the unfavorable actions of his heroes, Apollodorus does not shield the reputation of his characters. He does not moderate their rage, need for vengeance, or misguided action. Due to the expansive length of his work, Apollodorus also includes extended backstories and ancestries in his narrative. These devices serve to elaborate on the more basic essential elements, in order to give the reader more information and explanation. Additionally, Apollodorus often adds alternate traditions, which shows his acknowledgment of the importance of the multiformity that pervades the Epic Cycle. A unique trait of Apollodorus is that he shows an affinity for prophecies, as he makes an effort to include and highlight them whenever possible. 

John Tzetzes *Homeric Allegories* is a very different work than that of Proclus and Apollodorus. His text is highly poetic and expansive. Many of his episodes go on at length, and occasionally include direct speech from his characters. This poetic flair allows him to include elements that must be passed over in more brief retellings. Additionally, he mixes the typical narrative sequence of several episodes. Episodes that center on a character who only makes a single appearance in the Cycle are mentioned in passing by Tzetzes, instead of forming their own episodes. Rather than aiming to layout the events of an epic, Tzetzes seeks to lay out the events that caused the action of the *Iliad*. Therefore, he takes care to bring his narrative right up to the point where this epic starts. Most notably, Tzetzes greatly favors Palamedes in his retelling. His personal connection with this Greek hero explains why this character, who is usually restricted to only a few episodes,  appears relatively frequently in this retelling. 

Due to its brevity, the hypothesis is the retelling with the most contracted episodes. With the glaring exception of the Judgment of Paris, which spans about a quarter of the text, many episodes are simply mentioned without any expansion. In the interest of space, the hypothesis skips over many of the stops that the Greek contingent made on its way to Troy. Furthermore, characters who appear only once also remain unmentioned. Another interesting facet of the hypothesis is that it seems to be influenced by the material in the rest of manuscript in which it is found. The explanatory nature of the arguments of the *Iliad* is carried over to the hypothesis, as it does provide an explanation to a few episodes that are not always present in other retellings. 

The Tabula Capitolina is a distinct retelling because it includes both textual and pictoral retellings. The images, by there nature, are more compressed than the episodes in other textual retellings. They show merely a snapshot of the episode, but this brevity does not render the episodes recognizable. Rather, the scenes provide just enough information to evoke the wider episode as known by the traditional audience. The Tabula tends to focus on the deaths of key figures, rather than displaying their actions. These deaths in themselves echos the figures actions, without the need to depict these elements directly. Additionally, the Tabula only shows events that happen at Troy. Characters only become important upon their arrival, and action that takes place on the surrounding island is left unmentioned.

The multiformity and expansion and contraction of episodes make it necessary for retellings to be looked at together. The intertextual references are best understood across an array of works that seek to retell the same narrative content. By dividing these works into episodes, a comparison of these units across the various retelling shows the different goals and preferences of each author. While the epics do have essential core episodes, the authors are as free as the nature of the work allows to add or omit certain elements to these vital units. The story itself cannot be altered to the point that it is unrecognizable to a traditional audience, but the order of certain events or the characters present can be changed to a fairly moderate degree. Always, the author of a retelling must write for an audience that is intimately familiar with the original source material. 