#Retellings of Events Before the *Iliad*#
##Proclus Summary, Apollodorus, Hypothesis, John Tzetzes##

The events that would have appeared in the *Cypria* would have began with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis and the judgment of Paris. From there, Paris takes Helen from Sparta back to Troy, causing the Greek forces to rally. After much delay and other exploits, they arrive at Troy and take the beach. The quarrel that opens the *Iliad* would have been found at the very end of the *Cypria*, once the Greeks had sacked an number of surrounding cities.

The sources mentioned above offer retellings of these events. Whether or not they were originally meant to retell Cyclic material is open to debate. However, they all begin with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis and end with Agamemnon taking Briseis from Achilles. Therefore, I have analyzed them together with the aim of finding the common episodes in each. In addition, this study revealed not only many differences within these episodes, but also a number of added or omitted episodes in certain retellings. Originally, I had planned to compare each of the episodes in order across all of the retellings. This soon became fruitless because the same episode does not always maintain its narrative sequence in other retellings. Instead, I have followed the episodic distinctions from Proclus' summaries and compared them to the corresponding passages in the other retellings. Any deviation from my previous break down of these episodes from Proclus will be explained in full. 

As mentioned above, each work opens with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. The essential elements of the story are that, during the wedding, Eris creates a contest based on beauty between Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite. Zeus then orders Hermes to escort the goddesses to Mt. Ida, where Paris judges Aphrodite to be the winner because she promised to give him the most beautiful women. 

In a more expanded form, Tzetzes, the hypothesis, and Apollodorus all place the wedding on Mt. Pelion, although this fact is given outside of the sections of Apollodorus that correspond to the Epic Cycle. These same sources mention the famous apple that Eris threw into the wedding, which is described as golden in the hypothesis and by Tzeztes. The location of the wedding and the physical representation of the strife are not essential to the episode. These sources also name not only the gift promised by Aphrodite, as all do, but also the gifts that Paris spurned from Hera and Athena. Though more poetically described by Tzeztes, these gifts are identical: an expansive kingdom, and military might. The promise of Helen is a vital element to this episode because it is what convinces Paris to favor Aphrodite. The hypothesis simply says that she promised τὴν καλλίστην γυναῖκα, while the other retellings directly name Helen.[West on a possible scene of introducing Helen]. Only the hypothesis explains the role of both Hermes and Paris by saying that Zeus did not want to judge the goddesses himself. 

Proclus and Apollodorus both offer an explanation for this event that caused the Trojan War to erupt. They both ascribe it to the will of Zeus. In Proclus, Zeus βουλεύεται μετὰ τῆς Θέμιδος/Θέτιδος  [ftnote on the manuscript and papyri] to bring about the war. Apollodorus writes that it is κατὰ βούλησιν Διός that Helen become famous for causing a war between Europe and Asia. Alternatively, he relates that others claim it is to exalt the race of demigods. This mention of the will of Zeus is not only unique shared between these two sources, but also echoes *Iliad* 1.5, which says that the death and destruction fulfilled Διὸς βουλή. [discuss scholion?]

While one could count Paris' journey to and from Sparta as a single episode based on the uniqueness of its characters and location, Proclus divides it into three separate episodes. His voyage there, his stay at Sparta, and his and Helen's return all receive separate attention. I have fused what I would normally consider two episodes into one from Paris' stay at Sparta. It is likely that Proclus used his typical καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα divider in this instance to show the escalation of Paris' actions before and after Menelaus' departure. 

The first episode is a minor one in which the only essential action is Paris' travel by sea. Excluding Proclus, all of the retellings name Phereclus as the builder of his ships [reference Iliad passage and family names]. The reminder of Proclus' elements seem to be unique. He writes that Aphrodite compels Aeneas to travel with Paris, while the hypothesis merely that he goes ἑταίρους ἀθροίσας. Further, no other retelling offers the warnings of Helenus and Kassandra at this point in the narrative. These Trojan seers give a number of admonishments, but never directly before Paris leaves for Sparta. Kastor and Pollux also do not feature in any retelling except for Proclus. The inclusion of this material would have served to explain their absence from the action of the *Iliad*[cite Iliad 3]. However, it appears to be a highly optional element, as it is strictly limited to Proclus' retelling. 

The episode at Sparta is marked by Paris visiting Helen and Menelaus, and then while his host is away for a burial in Crete, the Trojan prince makes off with both his wife and his property. [κτηματα or χραματα?]. The theft of this property is a small, but crucial element because it plays a role in the embassy to Troy later on in the narrative. Across the various retellings, all except Tzetzes stress the guest-host relation of Paris and Menelaus. In both the hypothesis and Apollodorus, Paris ξενισθεὶς(δὲ) παρὰ Μενελάῳ. In Proclus, Menelaus instructs Helen to look after the ξένοις. This fairly common element stresses the severe affront offered to the host Menelaus by his guest Paris. Tzetzes and Apollodorus add two separate characters to this episode. In his retelling, Apollodorus writes that Helen abandons her nine year old daughter Hermione. She is alluded to in the *Iliad*, but does not play a significant enough role to be vital to this episode[Iliad 3]. Tzeztes notes that Aethra goes with Helen to Troy. Here Tzetzes is alluding to an episode that is mentioned in the *Iliupersis* [Iliad 3 and Sack of Troy]. . However, like Hermione, the figure of Aethra is not central to Helen's departure. 

The question of Helen's willingness to leave with Paris has been a subject of much debate since antiquity [cite Herodotus?]. The hypothesis, Tzetzes, and Apollodorus all use a form of the verb ἁρπάζω, or ἀφαρπάζω in the case of Tzeztes, to describe how Paris carried off Helen. The harsh connotation of this verb shows her unwillingness to leave her husband and home land. Tzetzes talks of Paris as being struck with love, but does not give his readers any insight into the emotional state of Helen. The hypothesis says that δόλω καὶ ἀπάτη φαίνεται τὴν Ἑλένην ἁρπάσας. The trick and deceit that Paris employs supports a forceful rape of Helen. However, Proclus' version tells a different side. He writes that Aphrodite brings the two together, and that they make love before leaving Sparta [cite Iliad 3]. This shows their flight in a different light, one that is not reflected in the other retellings. 

Next, Menelaus finds out about Helen's departure and musters the Greek forces. This episode, through relatively brief, is fairly varied throughout the different retellings. Proclus' account has the most unique elements. After learning of the events from Iris, Menelaus goes first to Agamemnon to plan the expedition, and then to Nestor who relates four mythological stories to him. The stories, as related by Proclus, focus on Eopopeus, Oedipus, the madness of Heracles, and Theseus and Ariadne [see West on these]. Apollodorus has Menelaus simply go to Agamemnon, but then mentions the oath of Tyndareus that all the suitors swore [earlier Apollodorus], which is the only reference to this element in any of these retellings. Furthermore, he issues a warning for all Greek men to be wary of their wives. This can be seen as a foreshadowing on Apollodorus' part of the demise that Agamemnon will meet at the hands of his own wife and her lover [cite Apollodorus part]. The hypothesis does not focus on Menelaus recognition of the rape of Helen, but rather talks of how ἡ τῆς ἁρπαγης φήμη διεδόθη κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλαδα. He goes on to state that the Greeks went to war because it seemed good to the Pythia. This early reference to the Delphic Oracle or her involvement with the Trojan War is not known in any other sources. Tztzes as well does not focus on Menelaus, but rather on the Greeks as a whole. He writes that they sent καὶ γράμματα καὶ πρέσβεις to the Trojans asking for Helen and the property to be returned. These embassies will be discussed later on in this chapter, as they occur after the landing at Troy in Proclus' retelling. This episode is a clear example of how a brief element can be expanded and changed according to the will and intent of the author. 

Within gathering the Greek forces, several retellings include the story of Odysseus' recruitment. A group of Greeks, including Palamedes, went to Ithaca to enlist Odysseus. However, he feigned madness out of a desire to avoid the war. The language of Proclus, μαίνεσθαι προσποιησάμενον, closely matches that of Apollodorus, προσποιεῖται μανίαν. Realizing the trick, Palamedes snatched Telemachus (from the breast of Penelope, according to Apollodorus) and made as if to kill him, thereby forcing Odysseus to drop his act. These events are treated as a distinct episode by Proclus and Apollodorus, but do not appear in either the hypothesis or Tzetzes. It can be seen as an element of the more general episode of mustering the Greek forces. The author of the hypothesis did not feel it was important to include individual recruitments, but was satisfied with merely saying that all the Greeks went to war. The character of Palamedes does not appear at any point of the hypothesis. John Tzetzes felt a great connection with Palamedes, and for this reason may not have wished to portray him acting aggressively towards the hero Odysseus [cite something]. The connection between Palamedes and John Tzetzes will be discussed later in this chapter. 
**talk about the death of Palamedes**

The first gathering at Aulis appears to be an important episode based largely on the involvement of Kalchas. His presence is closely tied to Aulis in all of the retellings, no matter how brief. The hypothesis mentions that he was the leading seer among the Greeks. The other retellings all cite his prophecy of the sparrows and the snake [cite Iliad 2]. The inclusion of this element across all four retellings is what solidifies Aulis as its own episode, as opposed to being merely an element of another episode. Aulis serves as an example of how the presence of one specific element can create an distinct episode. The importance of this prophecy is made evident in its inclusion in the *Iliad*. It foretold the length of the Trojan war, and provides authority to the prophetic skill of Kalchas. 

Next, the Greeks land at Teuthrania and attack it because they think it is Troy. After Telephus, the king of Mysia, kills Thersander, he is wounded by Achilles. Then, a great storm disperses the Greek forces, bringing Achilles to Skyros, where he marries Deidamea, the  daughter of Lycomedes. This episode seems to be made up of elements that are only loosely connected based off of what one can tell from Proclus' retelling. Due to the abbreviated nature of his writings and the fact that these events are not sequential or even sometimes present in other retellings, it is difficult to see what connection Proclus would have created between the elements of this episode. Although he does use his usual episode marker ἔπειτα before and after this section, what comes after is still related to Telephus. Had the events at Skyros not been placed in between the passages concerning Telephus, the singular appearance of Telephus in the Cycle would have made these passage one episode. Still, the inclusion of Achilles' trip to Skyros and the attack on Teuthrania in the same episode, going off of Proclus' temporal episodic dividers, is enough to let them stand as the same unit. 

However, taking this episode as a whole presents problems when looking at the retellings other than Proclus. Not only are they not sequentially linked anywhere else, but they do not even appear in the hypothesis. It is completely silent on both the attack on Teuthrania and Achilles' stay at Scyros. There are a number of possible explanations for its exlusion. It is out of this union that Neoptolemos is born [see Little Iliad and Sack of Troy parts], who plays a large part in the Trojan War after the events of the *Iliad*. However, this is a hypothesis of the *Iliad*, and therefore does not concern itself with the events after this epic. There is no need to foreshadow later Cyclic events, as the hypothesis solely sets out to tell the essential events before the *Iliad*. An analysis of the geographic names present in this retelling reveals that very few of the stops that the Greek forces made on the way to Troy are named. Only Aulis and Lemnos, in connection with Philoctetes, appear in the hypothesis. The author did not concern himself with each side journey, but rather glosses over much of the voyage to Troy. His focus is to set the scene for the *Iliad*, not to give every detail of the journey. 

Apollodorus provides a characteristically expanded version of the attack on Teuthrania. He does include, like Proclus and Tzetzes, that it was the death of Thersander, son of Polynices, that spurred Achilles to confront Telephus one on one. However, Apollodorus explains the details of the wound that Achilles inflicted on Telephus, namely that he tripped with his foot entangled in a vine branch. The wound is important because it figures prominently in the following episode with Telephus.  Tzetzes not only has a fairly contracted retelling of the Telephus episode, but also does not place it in the same narrative sequence as Proclus and Apollodorus. Instead, it is part of a speech given by Palamedes while he is on trial for plotting against the Greeks. A discussion of the character of Palamedes will be given later in this thesis.

The element of the visit to Scyros, as mentioned before, is unique to Proclus when combined with this episode. While the hypothesis is again silent on the event, Apollodorus does retell it in his work. However, it appears in the middle of book 3 as part of a brief section on the early part of Achilles' life[Ap. 3.8.1-3.8.8]. This passage is outside the bounds of Apollodorus' Epic Cycle section, as are events concerning the birth of Paris, and the birth and betrothal of Helen. Apollodorus has Kalchas foretell that Troy would not be taken without Achilles, and consequently Thetis chooses to hide him as a girl in the court of Lycomedes, king of Scyros. Tzetzes makes a highly compressed reference to the events at Scyros, notably not mentioning the place by name or the tryst with Lycomedes' daughter Deidamea. Instead, he writes that Chiron, the centaur teacher of Achilles, foretold the two possible outcomes for Achilles in direct speech to Thetis[ὁσὸς υἱὸς ὁ Ἀχϊλλεὺς μένων ἐν τῇ πατρΐδϊ· ἔσεται πολϋχρόνϊος πλὴν ἐκ τῶν ἀδοξούντων· εἰ μετὰ τῶν Ἑλλήνων δὲ κατὰ τῶν Τρώων πλεύσει, ἔνδοξος ἔσται καὶ λαμπρὸς ἀλλὰ σϋντόμως θνήσκει]. Tzetzes does not provide much more information, but says that Thetis hid him out of fear for her sons's life. He writes that φοβεθεὶς τὸν πόλεμον ἐφόρει γϋναικεῖα, καὶ σῢν παρθὲνοις ἱστουργῶν κρϋπτόμενος ὑπῆρχε[Tzetzes Proleg line 438-439]. This passing reference to hiding among young girls evokes the episode of Scyros without explicitly stating it. It is interesting that Tzetzes is so brief in this passage about a younger Achilles, when he devotes a great number of lines to the a discussion of a young Paris[Tzetzes Proleg line 171-213].

After this, the wounded Telephus seeks out the Greeks, particularly Achilles, in order to be healed. Proclus says that he does this κατὰ μαντείαν[Cypria.14], while Apollodorus names Apollo as the one who suggested that ὁ τρώσας ἰατρὸς γένηται[Apollod. Epitome.3.19]. The element of Achilles as the healer is essential to this episode as he was the one who inflicted the original wound. Upon being healed, both of these sources say that, in a notable instance of foe turning guide, the Mysian king leads the Greeks to Troy. Apollodorus goes further to say that Kalchas confirmed the route of Telephus by means of his prophetic powers. This nod to the Greek seer is in accordance with Apollodorus' custom of including prophesies and divination in his retelling. Like the beginning of Telephus' action in the Cycle, the hypothesis does not contain this part of the episode nor does Tzeztes provide much detail beyond a passing reference.

Connected to the healing of Telephus is the sacrifice of Iphigenia. Proclus pairs the end of Telephus' involvement with the focal point of the episode because it is Telephus who guides the Greek forces to Aulis for the second time. Here Agamemnon must offer his daughter to Artemis, in order that the Greeks be able to sail on to Troy. Each retelling, again with the exception of the hypothesis, include a version of this episode. Its wide presence supports the fact that it is an essential episode, even though it is not included in the hypothesis, where it must have been seen as merely another stop on the way. In Tzetzes, the sacrifice happens at the first and only gathering at Aulis, since he does not include the Greek forces being scattered and Telephus leading the Greeks back there. Both Proclus and Apollodorus specify that it was the τὸ δεύτερον gathering at Aulis. Tzetzes' version is the most contracted. Like the other two retellings, he acknowledges the fact that the winds were preventing the Greeks from sailing. After killing a deer of Artemis, he brings his daughter Iphigenia in order to sacrifice her. However, he slaughters the deer instead of his daughter, who then is made a PRIESTESS of Artemis. 

Proclus expands this episode to explain that Artemis held the ships χειμῶνας ἐπιπέμπουσα[Cypria.15] on account of the boasting of Agamemnon upon shooting a deer. Kalchas is the one who demands the sacrifice of Iphigenia, and use the excuse of marrying her to Achilles to bring her to Aulis. Artemis saves the girl just before she is killed, and places a deer upon the altar instead. She takes her to the Tauroi and makes her immortal. Apollodorus agrees with this version, but expands it further. He provides more of the back-story of Artemis' wrath by adding that it was in part due also to Atreus' failure to sacrifice a golden lamb to her. Agamemnon sends for his daughter actively GREEK by sending Odysseus and Talthybius, as opposed to in Proclus where unspecified Greeks are passively sent GREEK. This sense of active blame in Apollodorus is in contrast to the lack of blame shown in Tzeztes, where the faults of heroes are often passed over. The same ruse of marrying the daughter to Achilles is used to convince Clytaemnestra to allow her to go. Apollodorus' version is a mix of Proclus and Tzetzes, as he has Artemis save the girl, carry her to the Tauroi, and make her a PRIESTESS[Apolld. E 3.22]. He then adds that OTHERS SAY that she was made immortal, just as Proclus says. 

The next episode focuses on the events on Tenedos and the abandonment of Philoctetes. Proclus is uncharacteristically brief with the first element of this episode[We should except this to have come in the *Cypria*, but it remains odd that Proclus says nothing of fighting on Tenedos - West 111]. He merely says ἔπειτα καταπλέουσιν εἰς Τένεδον[Cypria.16]. There is no reference the attack on Tenedos nor to Achilles' slaying of Tenes, the eponymous ruler of the island[The absence of any reference to the killing of Tennes in Proklos' summary could indicate that it was not a part of the *Kypria*, but we really have very little means of controlling how complete that summary is - Gantz 592]. As is typically seen, the hypothesis does not include this side stop.  Tzeztes is silent on Tenes as well. Apollodorus, however, offers a highly expanded version of this part of the episode. As he often does, he provides the fully back story and genealogy of Tenes[Apollod E 3.23-3.25], before narrative his death at the hands of Achilles. Importantly, he includes a prophecy that said that, if Achilles slew Tenes, he himself would be killed by Apollo. Because Apollodorus provides an alternate ancesty in which Apollo fathered Tenes, GREEK, this alludes to a wider prophecy warning Achilles against slaying any son of Apollo. 

All four retellings include the essential element of Philoctetes abandonment on Lemnos. Proclus writes that, while feasting on Tenedos, Philoctetes was bitten by a water snake and was κατελείφθη[Cypria.16] on Lemnos due to the smell. The hypothesis includes a sentence on Philoctetes, which echoes the passivity of his abandonment with the verb form καταλειφθῆναι[cite passage]. While this episode is very brief by the standards of other retellings, it is appropriately long for the highly abbreviated nature of the hypothesis. It is surprising that the hypothesis choose to foreshadow the involvement of Philoctetes in later Cyclic events, but, as we have already seen, does not do the same for Neoptolemos. Similarly, Tzetzes only includes one line on this episode, which is found in the catalog entry for Philoctetes. He writes ὡς δὲ δηχθεὶς ὑπ’ ὄφεως ἦν ἐκρϊφεὶς ἐν Λΐμνω·[Tzetzes Proleg 611]. While brief, this one line does accurately explain the events of the more expanded versions of this episode. Apollodorus retells the most expanded version of the story with several extra elements. First, he writes that Philoctetes had in his possession the bow of Heracles, which a traditional audience would know it will be needed later to take Troy, according to a prophecy. Further, Apollodorus names Odysseus as the one who leaves his fellow hero on Lemnos, following the orders of Agamemnon. Again this retelling shows its preference for active blame, even if it does not reflect well on a particular hero. In all of the retellings except for Tzetzes, Philoctetes is bitten by a ὕδρος. Both Apollodorus and Proclus say that he was bitten during a great feast  on Tenedos, and then moved to Lemnos[on the move of Philoctetes from Tenedos to Lemnos, see West 112-113]. Proclus also includes an element that is unique to his retelling of this episode. Achilles quarrels with Agamemnon because he was invited late to the feast. This can be seen as a foreshadowing of the dispute between the two leaders in *Iliad* 1 [see West 113].

At last, the Greek forces reach the shores of Troy, and the fighting begins. The episode of the first landing at Troy centers on the death of Protesilaos, the first Greek to disembark. Proclus says that the Greek army lands, Protesilaos disembarks, and then he is killed by Hector. The hypothesis, which includes this episode due to the fact that the action has now reached Troy, manages to expand this episode with a remarkably brief economy of words. The author explains the significance of his death by adding explaining that he πρῶτον ἀποθορώντας τῆς νεὼς. Apollodorus and Tzetzes both include this notion of his death being tied to the fact that he landed on the beach first. Tzetzes references Protesilaos twice: once in his catalog entry[Proleg 600 πρῶτος πάντων δὲ πεσὼν τῇ σϋμβολῆ πολέμου.] and once in the appropriate narrative sequence where he gives the full story[Proleg 837-855]. He too explains the significance of being first to land by saying ἦν γὰρ χρησμὸς τὸν ἄρξαντα πρῶτος θανεῖν τῶν ἄλλων[Proleg 838]. Apollodorus notes that Protesilaos killed NOT A FEW TROJANS, thereby showing his strength and courage. Both Tzetzes and Apollodorus recount the reaction of his young wife Laodamia[Apollod. E 3.30] or Polydora[Pausanias 4.2.7], who was stricken with grief upon hearing of her husband's death[on a possible digression concerning the suicide of his wife, see Severyns 1928 pg 302]. **note Iliad 2.700 connection and how important her cool story is **

The next episode poses a problem of chronology, as its elements are not always in the same order, or even tied at all. Proclus pairs first the death of Cycnus at the hands of Achilles with an embassy to Troy demanding the return of Helen and the stolen κτήματα. The death of Cycnus is mentioned in passing by Proclus, and omitted by the hypothesis. The hypothesis generally avoids characters that only appear once in the Cycle, such as Cycnus, Tenes, Palamedes, and other. Apollodorus keeps this element relatively brief, but adds that Achilles kills him by throwing a stone at his head. Additionally, it is the death of this hero that drives the Trojans into their citadel and behind its high walls. **READ TZETZES**

Proclus says that the embassy occurs after both sides gather their dead, which suggests that after the success of the initial Greek assault, they felt that they should at least attempt a diplomatic solution. The author of the hypothesis follows this timeline. In Apollodorus, the embassy occurs before the first landing at Troy. Tzetzes places the embassy well before the Greeks even land at Aulis [Proleg 400-412].  The embassy is mentioned in *Iliad* 3 as part of the TEIXOSKOPIA, where the ambassadors are Odysseus and Menelaus. Both the hypothesis and Apollodorus agree with this, while Proclus does not name those who are sent. Tzetzes, however, has three different embassies. The first is Acamas? with Diomedes, then Palamedes, and lastly Odysseus and Menelaus bearing letters from Clytemnestra[Proleg 402-405]. The addition of Palamedes is highly characteristic of Tzetzes, as he identified strongly with this hero. I will elaborate on this more in the death of Palamedes. The alternate position of this episode in the respective chronologies of the different retellings shows how episodes can not only be expanded and contracted, but also can appear in a different order, so long as they do not alter the story. 

Proclus merely says that the embassy was not successful, and that this lead to the siege of Troy. The other retellings all expand this episode to explain that the Trojans, particularly Antimachus in Tzetzes, wanted to kill the Greek ambassadors. However, Antenor saved them, as they were guests in his house. Both Tzetzes and Apollodorus cite this malicious behavior towards protected guests as what spurs the Greeks on to attack Troy. The contrast between the length of the expansion of this element in the hypothesis with the brevity of it in Proclus is rare. The emphasis on Antenor is most likely included as it echos the events of the later epics, in which the Trojan's family is spared in the destruction of the city [see West 117]

Once the Trojans shut themselves behind the gates of Troy, the Greeks begin to ravage the Troad. There was no way to fight directly with the Trojans, but the Greeks had to do something to pass the remaining nine years before the action of the *Iliad* began. Proclus seems to view this episode as essential, but not particularly noteworthy. Unlike other retellings, he does not list any of the cities sacked by the Greeks, who were lead by Achilles. This brevity is not unseen in Proclus, as he does not fully detail Paris' exploits on his journey home to Troy after having taken Helen[Cypria.6]. It is not surprising either that the hypothesis does not list the cities taken in this episode, but merely says that the Greeks τὰς πλγσίον πόλεις ἥρουν with Achilles as the leader[cite passage]. Palamedes is another main leader of these sacks in Tzetzes, which again shows the authors affinity for this character. **His habit of adding Palamedes in where no other retelling includes him is seen frequently through his work [examples]. (MIGHT WANT THIS WITH THE PALAMEDES SECTION!?!?!)** Tzetzes and Apollodorus both provide an extensive list of these conquered cities. West has provided an excellent list of these cities that are referenced throughout the Homeric epics[West 118], to which I have compared the lists of these two retellings. **COMPARE LISTS** Tzetzes and Apollodorus closely match one another in not one cities sacked but also in the order that they are listed. Occasionally, Tzetzes is forced to switch the position of two cities, in order to fit his political meter. 
**AND FOOTNOTE THE CITIES** These catalogs are typical of Tzetzes and Apollodorus, who both have the space to include them in their retellings. 

The next episode in Proclus encompasses a number of different events. He places a visit between Achilles and Helen, the theft of Aeneas' cattle, the sacks of two additional cities, the death of Troilus, the capture of Lycaon, and the allotment of Briseis to Achilles and Chryseis to Agamemnon all in this one episode. West says that "such exploits as are assigned to this nine-year period are in fact almost exclusively Achilles'. It is unlikely that the poet distinguished one year from another until it came to the tenth[West 118]." This rapid narrative style may explain why this episode that take place during this time period is filled with very separate elements. None lead causally to the next, but rather they document the activities of the Greeks during this period devoid of direct battles. The element of Achilles wishing to see Helen is unique to Proclus. He writes that Thetis and Aphrodite arrange the meeting[cite oral palimpsest book], and the suggests that, upon seeing the beauty that has caused the great war, Achilles persuades the already war-weary Greeks to remain at Troy.

Another element that appears in various retellings is a conflict between Achilles and Aeneas. This appears in Proclus, Apollodorus, and the hypothesis. In the hypothesis, it is alluded to with the phrase  κατα στάσιν ἐγεῖραι[cite passsage]. Proclus further describes the conflict by saying that Achilles ἀπελαύνει τὰς Αἰνείου βόας[Cypria.21]. Apollodorus, as is usual, gives the most expanded back-story of this element. He writes that Aeneas flees from Achilles during the cattle raid, and then the Greek hero κτείνας καὶ Μήστορα τὸν Πριάμου τὰς βόας ἐλαύνει[Apolld. E 3.32]. The episode seems to be important because it brings two great heroes into contact early on, beyond the fact that the episode is mentioned in the *Iliad*[*Iliad* 20.90-20.93, and 20.188-20.194]. 

The death of Troilus and the capture of Lycaon seem to be linked because they are both sons of Priam that died tragically. Troilus appears in the hypothesis, but Lycaon does not. Neither are mentioned by Tzetzes. Proclus and Apollodorus both use the verb φονεύει to talk about Achilles killing Troilus. This verb choice, instead of a form of κτείνω or another similar verb, is perhaps due to the fact that  Achilles ἐνεδρεύσας Troilus, as Apollodorus says. His death may have been seen as more tragic due to his young age, compared to the other sons of Priam that Achilles kills. In the element of Lycoan, Proclus and Apollodorus tell complimentary sides of his fate. Proclus writes that Patroclus sells him into slavery on Lemnos, and Apollodorus says that Achilles captured him by coming to the city a night. West notes that the Lycaon part of this episode was probably added to fit with his appearance in *Iliad* 21[West 122]. 

The last element of this episode sets up the action of the *Iliad*. Proclus  sets up the inevitable dispute with a balanced μὲν δὲ construction when he writes Ἀχιλλεὺς μὲν Βρισηΐδα γέρας λαμβάνει, Χρυσηΐδα δὲ Ἀγαμέμνων [Cypria.23]. The disruption of this allotment of war prizes is what sparks the wrath of Achilles that opens the *Iliad*. It is also where the hypothesis and the *Homeric Allegories* stop their narratives. Because both of their goals were to retell the events that occurred before the *Iliad*, they include the foundation of the dispute, but nothing more. Apollodorus does not include this element because he begins his retelling of the *Iliad* in his next section. Since he retells the Homeric epics, unlike the other retellings, he does not need certain elements such as this one.

The last episode within the narrative bounds of the Cypria is similar to the preceding in that it is made up of disparate elements. Proclus lists the death of Palamedes, Zeus' plan to remove Achilles from battle, and the Trojan catalog. While the hypothesis does not treat Palamedes, Proclus is not much more generous when he simply writes ἔπειτά ἐστι Παλαμήδους θάνατος[Cypria.24]. Apollodorus expands this episode to recount the full death of Palamedes, but does so immediately after he foils Odysseus plan to avoid the war [Apollod. Epit. 3.8]. Palamedes is dead before the Greeks even gather at Aulis. This conflicts drastically with the retelling of Tzetzes, who uniquely attributes Palamedes with a number of actions. The entry for Palamedes in the catalog of Greek forces is longer than any other entry[Prol 724-739].