#Chapter 4: Divisions of Episodes Across the Various Retellings#

**NOT ready to be read yet**

The Homeric epics are complex narratives that not only do not follow a linear progression, but are also full of digressions. Since the other poems of the Epic Cycle grew out of the same oral tradition, it follows logically that they too would have been as complicated. Aristotle acknowledges the complexity of these epics by stating that their plots have produced many tragedies  [Poetics 1459a37]. Although this argument is often used to cite the failings of the Cyclic poems and to differentiate them from the Homeric epics, Aristotle's view in a sense supports the need to divide these epics into smaller units, such as episodes. 

An episode is a recognizable unit of narrative action. Its contents form a cohesive set that can be isolated from the larger work. When deciding what events constitute a single episode, I have done my best to follow the ancient critic's views [cite Nunlist].  It is better to err on the side of an episode that is more inclusive, than to break what should be one episode up into several. For example, Nunlist writes that "THING ABOUT THE CYCLOPES AND ODYSSEUS" [citation]. 

Certain retellings have evident episodic divisions present in text, but this is not always the case. Imposing divisions is a more difficult and interpretative process. One can create episodes based on geographic terms, such as the Greeks attack on Teuthrania, but only if the episode is fairly brief. Conversely, the events that take place at Troy do not by any means form a single episode. One could mark the entire episode as the journey to and from a location, as well as the events that happen on the sight, such as Paris' trip to Sparta and the cities which he sacks on his way back. Yet, poets composed entire epics about solely one leg of a journey, such as the *Odyssey* and the *Nostoi*,. Dividing episodes based on characters also proves to be difficult. Characters that show up infrequently and do not remain in focus for very long, such as Penthesilea, can mark their own episodes. But this does not work for more major characters who appear often, or in back to back episodes. A more complex approach is needed to create episodes based off of thematic content. Not only does the combination of location and certain main characters help to create an episode, but also the presence of more minor characters can often indicate an episode. A polythetic approach allows one to view each episode as a unit that fulfills a number of specific criteria, but not necessarily all of them.**Need more about that?** This approach is useful when comparing episodes across different retellings, as different authors include or exclude certain elements. 

##Proclus##

Within the summaries of the individual epics, Proclus' separates his narrative into distinct episodes with the use of strong transitional adverbs or prepositional phrases, such as ἔπειτα or μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα. In contrast, he uses common connective particles, such as καὶ and δὲ, to continue the narrative within the boundary of an episode. 

The narrative action that appears within the units that are formed by  these phrases support the idea of taking these . For example, the *Cypria* summary offers examples that  form the desired narrative units. For example,  characters that do not appear frequently in this epic, such as Iphigenia, Philoctetes, and Protesilaos, form the center piece of distinct episode [*Cypria* 15-17]. In accordance with this polytetic approach, the geographic change further supports these units as separate episodes. Iphigenia is sacrificed at Aulis, Philoctetes is abandoned on Lemnos, and Protesilaos fall at the beach of Troy. Additionally, more expanded aspect of an particular action can be contained within an episode. Proclus has placed the recruitment of Odysseus within the episode of the rallying of the Greek commanders [*Cypria* 10]. His involvement is merely one aspect of this wider narrative unit. 

The summary of the *Aithiopis* provides a clear example of the kind of questions that these episodic division set by Proclus raise. Proclus breaks this epic into five episodes, which only coincidentally matches the number of books that he offers[list episode and book numbers for rest, no connection]. A close analysis of the events of these episodes reveals that Proclus did not place arbitrary in his summaries, but rather had these divisions already in mind. While all of the action of this epic is intimately connected, each episode centers on a key figure or event. For example, the first episode is devoted to Achilles slaying the Amazonian queen Penthesilea, the second to the Ethiopian Memnon slaying Antilochos, then the deaths of Memnon and Achilles, then the burial of Antilochos with Achilles, and lastly Thetis transporting her son's body. 

These divisions do not always match up exactly with what might be expected. All of Penthesilea's actions are contained in one episode, but the actions of Memnon span two episodes. The ἔπειτα division in *Aithiopis* section 6 comes in between when Memnon slays Antilochus and when he himself falls and is made immortal. Perhaps Proclus viewed the death of Memnon more closely bound to the death of Achilles, as he joined it to this event rather than to the death of Nestor's son. Arguments such as this must be made each time that Proclus' episodes do not align exactly with what one would expect to be an episode. I have largely maintained the integrity of Proclus' divisions, and noted each time that I have stretched his boundaries [look more into that].
  
However, this not all of Proclus' summaries have these episodic dividers. They are hardly present in the *Nostoi* or the *Iliupersis* [with only 3 in each]. This difference cannot be due to the alleged size of these particular poems, if one is to follow the numbers given by Proclus. While book number does not necessarily correlate to the length of the work as a whole, both poems have the same number of books or more than the others in which episode divisions are present.

A possible explanation for the missing episode distinctions in the *Nostoi* is that the poem would have naturally fallen into separate episodes as the poet switched between narrating each different group of heroes' journeys home. Many of the Greek kings traveled home from Troy with not only their own men, but also with other kings. Because each of these groups took separate routes, the reader finds transitions when Proclus changes his focus. Beyond simply looking for a new character in the nominative case, a reference to a group of ships or to "the ones around" a particular hero marks transitions. If the poem told the complete story of the journey home of a hero or group of heroes, then the change in characters in the summary would be enough to signal a change of episode. Following this logic, the summary of the *Nostoi* is divided into six episodes that deal directly with journeys home, as well two additional episodes at the beginning and end with extra information. 

This theory does not apply to the *Ilioupersis*, which also lacks these linguistic divisions. Proclus appears to place the dispute over the Horse, Sinon's trick, and the bulk of the Greek assault on Troy into one episode. After this, he lists the fate of a small number of Trojans in the next episode, and then concludes the summary with the departure of the Greeks [following the ms tradition, NOT West's edition]. It is possible that the assault on Troy and the ensuing carnage was covered in rapid succession in the original poem. One can imagine the Greek forces flooding through the city, and the poet panning through the destruction and covering the essential deaths in his own order. If these deaths or captures were happening simultaneously, but in different parts of the citadel, they could be viewed as separate elements of the single episode made up on the Greek assault.  However, events such as the Trojan deliberation over what to do with the Horse and Sinon's ploy to enter Troy seem to belong to independent episodes. The shift in focus, from the Trojans to the Greek camp strongly suggests that these actions ought to be taken separately from the death and destruction at Troy, although Proclus does not separate them. This seems to be the biggest flaw in Proclus' episodic divisions. 

Because the episode dividers are largely logical and present in the summary of Proclus, I have taken them as the main source with which to compare the other retellings against. When these distinctions are not available, like in the *Ilioupersis*, I have followed a similar method of dividing episodes that I have used in the other retellings.  

##Apollodorus##

The retelling of Apollodorus in the *Library* does not posses any linguistic dividers like those of Proclus. His text is a continuous narrative that does not mark the boundaries of any epic or books within a particular epic. Only once in his retelling of the Epic Cycle does he cite one of his sources by name [Apollodorus Epitome 5.14]. The fact that this retelling falls in the epitome, rather than the main work itself, makes it even more difficult to look for divisions of episodes based on linguistic features. The epitome is comprised of two different sources: the Epitoma Vaticana known as Vaticanus 950 and the Sabbaitic fragments known as Sabbaiticus-Hierosolymitanus 366 [Diller 304 - 305 and Frazer's sigla]. The Epitoma Vaticana "consist[s] of disconnected passages beginning with ὅτι [Diller 304]." These ὅτι passages do help identifying episodic divisions, but are too infrequent to be relied upon heavily[count number in EC retelling].

In order to divide this work into episodes, I have followed a polythetic approach whereby significant characters, events, and geography work to mark a particular episode. Following the definition of episodes as recognizable units, my divisions are what I believe to be logical, cohesive sections of the text. A new episode starts when the main character in focus changes, a new geographic location is reached, or an essential action occurs. It is important not to truncate an episode too early, especially in the text of Apollodorus. He often provides expanded genealogies and backstories, which must be taken together with the main action of the episode. For example, the backstory explaining Penthesilea's involvement in the Trojan war is an element that Apollodorus chose to include within her broader episode [Apollodorus Epitome 5.1-5.2]. It is not its own episode because it does not fit logically with the narrative sequence of the retelling. 

Occasionally, Apollodorus includes variant traditions, or multiforms, in his text. I have taken these together with the main action of the episode, as they do not constitute a new episode themselves, but rather a variation on a preexisting episode. The capture of Helen provides an example of this practice of including multiforms, when in addition to have Helen leave with Paris to Troy, Apollodorus also acknowledges that "some say that, according to the will of Zeus, Helen was conveyed secretly by Hermes to Egypt and was given to Proteus, the king of the Egyptians, to guard, and Paris arrived at Troy with a false likeness of Helen having been made out of clouds[Apollodorus Epitome 3.5]". Because Apollodorus does not assert that this event occurred, it does not form its own episode, but rather is a variant element of Paris' actions at Sparta. 

I have largely relied on a combination of these practices while also employing the divisions offered by Proclus to divide the text of the *Library*. When Apollodorus includes an major event that Proclus omits, this action more often than not became an episode that was unique to Apollodorus, or simply not included by Proclus.

##John Tzetzes##


##Hypothesis##

The hypothesis of the *Iliad* is the briefest retelling that I have worked with in this research. Although dwarfed by Apollodorus, it too is a continuous, although choppy narrative. With the exception of the Judgement of Paris, which spans about a quarter of the hypothesis, many episodes consist of merely a sentence or two. This brevity sheds great light on what the essential elements to a given episode are, due to the highly contracted nature of this text. In this text, it is largely the personal names that denote different episodes, as the geographic movement is not always state. The closing comments that link the hypothesis to the start of the *Iliad* have been ignored, as they are not narrative action, but rather an explanation of the text. 

##Tabula Capitolina##

As mentioned above, the Tabula Capitolina offers both a visual and textual retelling of the Epic Cycle. I have worked with the textual retelling, which is the stone stele with the prose summary of books 7 through 24 of the *Iliad*, in the same way that I have worked with the text of Apollodorus. Like the *Library*, no episodic divisions are present in the text. I have generally followed the Iliadic book divisions offered Petrain in his work on this document [cite Petrain 2014 188-191].

The visual aspect of the Tabula Capitolina is highly  complex
