##Retellings of the Iliad and the Epic Cycle##

#Introduction#

From their genesis to the present day, the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey* have been praised for their poetic and narrative excellence. As these epics became central to both Greek and Roman education, the need arose for shorter, more compact versions of this material to be circulated. However, the length and complexity of these poems made it a difficult task to break them down into smaller units. These summaries, or retellings, are remarkably dense, while still being abbreviated. In an attempt to give only the essential action, many scenes and even whole characters were cut out. This practice of retelling the Homeric epics reveals what were considered the vital parts, or episodes, within these poems. The way in which these retellings are separated into episodes, what is included and excluded, and the characters who appear in them all provide insight into how an ancient audience would have read not only these summaires, but also the epics themselves.

In addition to the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, six other epic poems existed in antiquity that filled out the story of the Trojan War. Beginning with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis found in the *Cypria*, and continuing until the death of Odysseus at the hands of his son in the *Telegonia*, these poems became known as the Epic Cycle. Originally oral epics, the poems of the Cycle became codified between the seventh and sixth centuries B.C. [1]. Yet, they failed to reach the level of fame that the Homeric epics had, and as a result, these poems ceased to exist in their original complete form somewhere between the third and fifth centuries A.D.[2]. 

These poems do not seem to have been as central to Greek and Roman education as the *Iliad*, or even the *Odyssey* were. Interest in these Cyclic epics was largely due to their thematic connection to the Homeric epics. This is clear from the way in which these Cyclic retellings are often closely paired with Homeric material, as will be explained later. Examples of retellings for not only the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, but also the Epic Cycle, both separately and as a whole, have survived. These Cyclic retellings come down to us in various forms, often with a different style and range. 

In the *Chrestomaty*, Proclus wrote summaries of the Epic Cycle, excluding the Homeric poems. These summaries provide a proposed author, the number of books, and a brief chronological summary of each work. The sole source for these summaries, excluding the one for the *Cypria*, is the Marciana 454 manuscript. The *Cypria* summary has been lost from this manuscript[3], but is preserved in several other manuscripts, such as the Escorial Omega 1.12.  

The *Bibliotheca*, attributed to a second century Apollodorus, is a lengthy collection of mythological stories, which covers the entire Epic Cycle in a continuous narration. It was most likely written in the first or second century [4]. This text offers variant stories and genealogies, and occasionally attributes them to certain authors. The epitome of this work, which is found in two manuscripts, contains five sections dedicated to the stories that span the Epic Cycle. Unlike Proclus, Apollodorus includes the action of both *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*. 

The Tabula Capitolina, one of  twenty-two stone tables that date to the early Roman period, contains both visual and textual retellings of the Epic Cycle. Although damaged, its original form would have shown carved scenes from the entire *Iliad*, as well as the *Aethiopis*, *Iliasparva*, and the *Iliupersis*. Additionally, two steles would have contained a continuous prose summary of the *Iliad*. After sustaining the damage, the Tabula now depicts scenes from the poems of the Epic Cycle mentioned above, as well as scenes from *Iliad* 1 and 13 through 24. Only the right hand stele remains, which contains the summary of *Iliad* 7 through 24. 

John Tzetzes wrote a work entitled *Homeric Allegories* in the twelfth century in order to introduce the foreign Empress Irene to Greek culture. In the proglegomena, he lays out for his reader the events that occurred before the *Iliad*. This section spans about a thousand lines, and roughly correspond to the events that would have been found in the *Cypria*.

It has been the aim of this thesis to look at the different retellings of the *Iliad* and the Epic Cycle in conjunction with one another, instead of analyzing one author or medium in isolation. However, the separate works were not used to fill out the text of another, as scholars often do, for example, with Proclus' summaries and the text of Apollodorus[5]. Each work was treated as a single, distinct entity. This allows one to draw conclusions based on the context of the work as a whole, rather than working from an artificial continuous narrative that was created by conflating multiple sources. 

Additionally, it is important to look at these works together because of the incomplete, but overlapping story that they tell. Apollodorus is the only work that covers the entire Epic Cycle; the rest offer a smaller selection. However, the different retellings of the same events that correspond to a particular epic provide excellent material for comparison. The varied genres of these works give one the opportunity to see how these retellings work across different styles and media. Additionally, one must keep in mind the goals of the different authors when comparing different sets of retellings. 

I have divided these works into episodes based on various criteria. Some texts have episodic divisions based on certain phrases or grammatical constructions, such as Proclus' summaries. When these divisions were not as consistent or evident, I created the divisions myself, following the ancient critic's view of episodes as often seen in the Homeric scholia [6]. A detailed explanation of my methods will be given in subsequent chapters. Regarding the Tabula, both visual and textual indicators work to create distinct episodes within the artistic narrative. 

When episodic divisions are not present linguistically in the text, but rather thematically, imposing divisions is a  more difficult and subjective process. One can create episodes based on geographic terms, such as the Greeks attack on Teuthrania, but only if the episode is fairly brief. Conversely, the events that take place at Troy do not by any means form a single episode. Similarly, characters that show up infrequently, such as Penthesilea, can mark their own episodes. But this does not work for more major characters who appear frequently and in back to back episodes. A more complex approach is needed to create episodes based off of thematic content. Not only does the combination of location and certain main characters help to create an episode, but also the presence of more minor characters can often indicate an episode.

Furthermore, primary source documents, such as diplomatic digital editions of manuscripts and inscriptions, form the foundation of this thesis whenever possible. The reason for this approach was to faithfully represent what is found in the original manuscript or epigraphic tradition of these works, rather than to correct them in a modern sense that would be foreign to their historical context. This decision and process will be expanded in later chapters. 

The question of episodic divisions in the retellings of the *Iliad* and the Epic Cycle is not in itself inherently digital. However, the complexity of an analysis across varied texts and media does lend itself to a digital environment. As mentioned above, the core of this thesis is built upon my own digital diplomatic digital editions. The ability to work with machine-actionable texts provides a higher level of accessibility to my materials and a better standard of scholarship to my results and findings. An analog research method would not have as readily revealed the same level of fine connections that I found through my digital research. All of my data is structured in .csv files with both machine-actionable URN's and human-readable labels. The URN's identify a specific unit, such as a passage of text or an analysis, and the labels provide context and an explanation for the human reader. 



[1]: West 25-26, Davies 1989

[2]: West 25-26

[3]: Monoro article

[4]: Frazer into XVI

[5]: See M.L. West's *The Epic Cycle* as well as his *Greek Epic Fragments* in the Loeb series for an example of this practice of combining different retellings to create an inauthentic but continuous narrative

[6]: Nunlist