##Chapter 7: Post-Iliadic Retellings: Apollodorus' *Library*, Proclus' Summaries, Tabula Capitolina##

###Aithiopis###

The *Aithiopis* follows the *Iliad* in the narrative sequence of the Epic Cycle. The poem begins with the arrival of the Amazonian queen Penthesilea. After her death, the poem focuses largely on the death and burial of Achilles. It closes with the famous dispute over whether Odysseus or Telamonian Ajax should win Achilles' arms. Proclus' summary of the *Aithiopis*, the corresponding section of Apollodorus' *Library*, and the images found in the band for this epic all aim to retell the events within these narrative bounds. The images from the Tabula have been damaged, and the remaining scenes pick up with the death of Penthesilea. It is difficult to tell how many episodes have been lost in the damage. Given the fact that the scenes for *Iliad* 1 that are found on the top band of the stone begin relatively close to the start of the book, it is likely that only one or two episodes were lost from the *Aithiopis* and from the *Little Iliad*. 

The first episode of this epic centers on Penthesilea. Proclus writes that she came to Troy συμμαχήσουσα[^1]. He provides a brief ancestry for the Amazon saying that she is Thracian by race and a daughter of Ares. She then fights bravely at Troy; Proclus goes as far to say that she ἀριστεύουσαν, before being killed by Achilles. This is echoed in Apollodorus who says that she μάχης γενομένης πολλοὺς κτείνει[^2] and includes Machaon among her victims. However, Machaon is alive and well in Proclus' summary of the *Little Iliad*, as he heals Philoctetes[^3].  The Tabula only preserves the death of Penthesilea[^4], not her *aristeia*[^5]. Even without a visual episode of her slaying her opponents, the mention of Penthesilea is enough to evoke the idea of her prowess and might.   Proclus adds that the Trojans buried her, which  highlights the importance of her figure that this phrase was included in the summary [^6].Apollodorus  expands the episode as he usually does to provide the backstory as to why Penthesilea came to fight in a war in which she had no stake. He writes that she needed to be purified for killing Hippolyte. Then, Apollodorus gives a history of Hippolyte[^7]. However, an almost identical passage occurs in Apollod. Epit. 1.17. Frazer says that the former location is where the passage occurs in the Sabbaitic fragments, and the latter is where it occurs in the Vatican Epitome. 

Another essential element to this episode is the death of Thersites. The troublesome Greek solider from *Iliad* 2 mocks Achilles, and then is killed by him out of rage. This scene is depicted on the Tabula, and the monument on which he is being killed is perhaps the tomb of Penthesilea [^8]. Apollodorus and Proclus both cite the source of Thersites' mockery was the love of Achilles for the Amazonian queen. Proclus says that it was his λεγόμενον ἔρωτα[^9], while Apollodorus strongly states that Achilles ἐρασθεὶς τῆς Ἀμαζόνος[^10]. Here we see another instance where Proclus is more cautious and passive, while Apollodorus uses more direct language. Uniquely in Proclus, the death of Thersites causes a στάσις among the Greeks. 

Then, Achilles sails to Lesbos to be purified, according to Proclus. This element to the following episode revolving around Memnon seems to be responding to the στάσις caused above. Since the στάσις is found only in Proclus, so too is the purification of Achilles only in that one retelling. After this, the Ethiopian son of Dawn arrives at Troy. Similar to Penthesilea, he wreaks having on the battle field, and then is killed by Achilles. Proclus says that he arrives ἡφαιστότευκτον πανοπλίαν[^11], and Apollodorus says that he comes μετὰ πολλῆς Αἰθιόπων δυνάμεως[^12]. This episode is a rare instance where Proclus expands the action more than Apollodorus. Memnon kills Antilochos, the son of Nestor and close friend of Achilles, thus enraging Achilles to the point of slaying Memnon. Proclus notes that καὶ Θέτις τῷ παιδὶ τὰ κατὰ τὸν Μέμνονα προλέγει, presumably that their fates were closely tied and that Achilles would not outlive Memnon by much[^13]. In Proclus, the death of Antilochos and the death of Memnon are separated by the word ἔπειτα, which usually marks an episodic division. However, due to how closely bound these two events are causally, I have treated them as one episode that deals with Memnon. Proclus ends his episode by having Dawn beg Zeus to grant her fallen son immortality. It is surprising how brief Apollodorus is on this episode, given his preference for backstories and alternate traditions. The Tabula treats Memnon in one episode, showing his death at the hands of Achilles with the slain Antilochos nearby[^14].

Following the death of Memnon is the death of Achilles and the retrieval of his body. This episode is divided into two on the Tabula[^15]. The first shows a fallen Achilles being shielded by Ajax, and the second showing one figure carrying the body and another fighting off potential attackers. The second scene bears the caption Ὀδυσσεύς. Ἀχιλλέως σῶμα, but does not specify which hero is bearing the body. The figures cannot be identified iconographically, but Proclus and Apollodorus both note that Odysseus fights off the Trojans while Ajax carries the body. The architectural structure on the Tabula that is used as an episodic divider resembles the city walls and a gate, which agrees with Apollodorus' addition of πρὸς ταῖς Σκαιαῖς πύλαις[^16] Both Proclus and Apollodorus write that Achilles was shot by an arrow from both Paris and Apollo. Even though the artist of the Tabula chose not to depict the scene in which Achilles is shot, a traditional reader of the stone would have no doubt as to what had occurred before moments before this first episode. During the struggle to retrieve Achilles' body, Ajax  Γλαῦκον ἀναιρεῖ, καὶ τὰ ὅπλα δίδωσιν ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς κομίζειν. West notes that while it may seem to be the ὅπλα  of Glaucus which is brought back to the ships, as it was originally the arms of Diomedes[^17], it is in fact that of Achilles. This is necessary to set up the dispute over his arms that closes this epic, and in Proclus, begins the next.

The next episode deals with the burial of Achilles. Proclus and Apollodorus disagree right from the beginning, as Proclus writes that Achilles was buried with Antilochos[Aithiopis.8], and Apollodorus has him buried with Patroclus[Apollod. Epit. 5.5]. In Apollodorus, the Greeks θάπτουσι δὲ αὐτὸν ἐν Λευκῇ νήσῳ, while it is Thetis who conveys her son to the White Island in the next episode of Proclus. Thetis and the Muses are present in both Proclus and the Tabula[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.655,0.3787,0.143,0.0907]. Both are identified by captions in the Tabula. Following an alternate tradition introduced by λέγεται, Apollodorus writes that Achilles weds Medea in the afterlife, which conflicts with *Odyssey* 11.471-11.540[Frazer pg.217 footnote 2]. 

Then in the next episode, according to Proclus, Thetis moves Achilles' body to the White Island. He writes that the Greeks have funeral games for Achilles, while Apollodorus expands his episode to include the winners [τιθέασι δὲ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἀγῶνα, ἐν ᾧ νικᾷ Εὔμηλος ἵπποις, Διομήδης σταδίῳ, Αἴας δίσκῳ, Τεῦκρος τόξῳ. Apollod. Epit. 5.5]. Comparison with the Tabula reveals what the main element of this episode is: the dispute of the arms of Achilles. Proclus writes that a στάσις occurs between Odysseus and Ajax[Aithiopis.10]. However, he does not say anymore at this point in his narrative. Rather, he ends the summary of the *Aithiopis* there, and returns to the dispute of the arms at the start of his summary of the *Little Iliad*[Little Iliad.2]. Apollodorus relates an expanded version of the dispute and its outcome. However, as his work does not contain breaks for different episodes, it is difficult to decide where to place his treatment of this episode. While we do not know how the Tabula episodes for the *Little Iliad* would have started, we do know that the last episode in the *Aithiopis* band depicts the madness of Ajax[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.779,0.384,0.104,0.0933]. Clearly the arms have already been awarded to Odysseus, but it is unclear at what stage the dejected hero is in his madness. In keeping with the practice of following Proclus' episodic divisions, I will treat the dispute of the arms in the next section, but the final scene on the Tabula must belong to the end of my discussion on  the *Aithiopis*.


###Little Iliad###

Following Proclus, the *Little Iliad* began with the dispute of Achilles' arms. He writes that Odysseus is awarded the prize κατὰ βούλησιν Ἀθηνᾶς[Little Iliad.2], which is different from her role in Apollodorus. As a result, Ajax slaughtered the flock of the Greeks in his madness, and then kills himself. Apollodorus writes that there is disagreement between whether Trojans (presumably captives) or whether Greeks judged the contest. He goes on to say that Athena drives Ajax mad upon losing, and that he slaughters the sheep because he thought they were the Greeks. Like in Proclus, he kills himself out of shame. Apollodorus expands his fate by saying that Agamemnon forbids Ajax's body to be burned, but rather to bury it in a coffin at Rhoiteion[See West pg. 178-179 on this unconventional practice]. He adds that Ajax μόνος οὗτος τῶν ἐν Ἰλίῳ ἀποθανόντων ἐν σορῷ κεῖται[Apollod. Epit. 5.7] No corresponding episode survives on the Tabula, save the one previously mentioned concerning the madness of Ajax.

The next episode in Proclus contains a few varied elements. His episode covers the capture of Helenus, the actions of Philoctetes, and the burial of Paris. The capture of Helenus, the Trojan seer and son of Priam, is at the front of this episode for Proclus. It is no doubt his prophetic skill that is the motivation for his capture, as the Greeks act next χρήσαντος περὶ τῆς ἁλώσεως τούτου[Little Iliad.3]. In Apollodorus, however, the capture of Helenus notably appears after the death of Paris. Once Helen's husband has died, Deiphobos and Helenus vie for her hand. When Helenus loses, he leaves for Ida, and is captured by Odysseus[Apollod. Epit. 5.9], as he is in Proclus. As we have seen frequently, Apollodorus displays his love of prophecies and oracles by listing the requirements for Troy's fall.[ὁ Ἕλενος λέγει πῶς ἂν αἱρεθείη ἡ Ἴλιος, πρῶτον μὲν εἰ τὰ Πέλοπος ὀστᾶ κομισθείη παρ᾽ αὐτούς, ἔπειτα εἰ Νεοπτόλεμος συμμαχοίη, τρίτον εἰ τὸ διιπετὲς παλλάδιον ἐκκλαπείη: τούτου γὰρ ἔνδον ὄντος οὐ δύνασθαι τὴν πόλιν ἁλῶναι. Apollod. Epit. 5.10]

After this, the character of Philoctetes is an essential element to this wider episode. It is upon Helenus' prophecy that Diomedes brings Philoctetes back from Lemnos. However, this prophecy comes from Kalchas in Apollodorus, as Helenus is not yet captive in the Greek camp[Apollod. Epit. 5.8]. Apollodorus also expands this element to explain that it is the bow of Heracles that is in Philoctetes' posession that is necessary to the Greeks' success, and he has Odysseus go with Diomedes to Lemnos. In a move fitting the Odysseus, Apollodorus writes that he δόλῳ ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος τῶν τόξων πείθει πλεῖν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ Τροίαν. Upon arriving at Troy, Proclus writes that Machaon heals Philoctetes, but since he is dead in Apollodorus' narrative [Apollod. Epit. 5.1], he writes that Podalirius heals him. Both authors have Philoctetes kill Paris, and Apollodorus emphasizes this duel of arches by saying that he Ἀλέξανδρον τοξεύει. Perhaps due to the damage it sustained, almost none of these elements survive in the Tabula. However, a fallen archer[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.004,0.4573,0.083,0.1547] is seen at the start of the band for the *Little Iliad*, which Petrain suggests could be Paris falling at the hands of Philoctetes. Proclus includes Paris' burial, but not before he writes that Menelaus mistreats his corpse, which seems uncharacteristically negative for Proclus. 

The next episode opens in Proclus with Deiphobos marrying Helen, as is seen in Apollodorus through the expanded contest between him and his brother Helenus. Then, Odysseus fetches Neoptolemos from Scyros by giving him the arms of his father[Little Iliad.5]. He adds that Ἀχιλλεὺς αὐτῷ φαντάζεται, a detail not known to other retellings. Before the trip to Scyros, Apollodorus writes that the Greeks sent for the bones of Peplos, a prophecy unmentioned in Proclus. He adds that Phoenix also accompanied Odysseus[Apollod. Epit. 5.11], which seems logical due to his connection to Achilles. Odysseus relinquishes the arms as well in this retelling. Neoptolemos only appears in the Tabula on the battle field, as the artist did not depict scenes that happened outside of Troy and the immediately surrounding lands. 

Like Penthesilea and Memnon, another ally comes to aid the Trojans. The Trojan king Eurypylus, son of Telephus, arrives at the battle field and is described as ἀριστεύσαντα by both text sources.[Little Iliad.6 and Apollod. Epit. 5.12]. The Tabula shows two figures making a sort of treaty, which Pertain takes to be Eurypylus and Priam[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.059,0.448,0.132,0.1587]. The next scene shows the death of the Mysian king at the hands of Neoptolemos[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.168,0.4533,0.157,0.1573], which agrees with the textual retellings. 

The next element for Proclus is can be treated as a different episode in the Tabula and Apollodorus. After introducing Epeios as he constructs the Trojan Horse on Athena's advice, Proclus writes that Odysseus enters the citadel and, after being recognized by Helen, they περὶ τῆς ἁλώσεως τῆς πόλεως συντίθεται[Little Iliad.9]. Then, he leaves the city, and in the next episode (signified by the usual  καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα), he returns to take the Palladion with Diomedes. Apollodorus, however, writes that Odysseus took the Palladion on his original trip into the city, after conferring with Helen. He too includes Diomedes, who waited outside of the city for Odysseus to return. Both heroes are essential, as they both appear named in the Tabula episode[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.304,0.456,0.137,0.1627]. Odysseus disfigures himself in both text sources, and puts on a beggar's clothes in Apollodorus. Unlike the bones of Peplos, the importance of the Palladion must have been a well known prophecy concerning the fall of Troy. 

The episode of the Trojan Horse is fairly expanded in all three retellings. The Tabula dedicates a large space to the Trojan procession that leads the Horse to the city[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.413,0.46,0.365,0.1747]. The scene is accompanied by the caption Τρωαδες και Φρυγες αναγουσι τον ιππον. Both Proclus and Apollodorus agree that only τοὺς ἀρίστους enter the horse, and Apollodorus adds that they are led by Odysseus. The latter says that fifty men entered the Horse, or ὡς δὲ ὁ τὴν μικρὰν γράψας Ἰλιάδα φησί, τρισχιλίους[Apollod. Epit. 5.14]. This explicit reference to the a specific work is not uncommon in Apollodorus, but it is the only time that it happens within his retelling of the Epic Cycle. Both text sources say that the Greeks set fire to their tents, and the rest of them retreat to Tenedos. Proclus adds that the Trojans had to break the top of the gate in order for the Horse to enter, clearly a bad omen that went unseen by many. Apollodorus also adds that the Greeks put an inscription on the Horse that reads τῆς εἰς οἶκον ἀνακομιδῆς Ἕλληνες Ἀθηνᾷ χαριστήριον[Apollod. Epit. 5.15]. While this episode according to Proclus is fairly laid out, it is typical of Apollodorus to add flairs such as this. In addition to burning the tents and hiding behind Tenedos, Apollodorus mentions that the Greek Sinon is left behind to let the rest of the army into the city. He is shown being taken into the city by Priam in the Tabula[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.768,0.4587,0.113,0.1787], which clearly is meant to evoke his role in the treachery done by the Greeks in order to enter the city. He is absent from Proclus' summary.

The last scene on the Tabula does not fall within the narrative bounds of Proclus' summary of the *Little Iliad*. Here we see Kassandra being restrained by another Trojan in front of the Scaean gate. No doubt she, in her prophetic wisdom, is protesting the admittance of the Horse into the city. It is notable that the artist of the Tabula chose to include this episode at the end of this epic, as Proclus brings his summary of the *Ilioupersis* with an episode where the Trojans debate about what to do with the Horse. However, he does not explicitly name Kassandra. 


###Ilioupersis###

The *Ilioupersis* would have narrated the events from the Trojans receiving the Horse until the Greek forces prepare to sail home, after pillaging and razing the city. The retelling of the Tabula Capitolina stops at end of this epic. Proclus' summary is nearly devoid of episodic divisions, as mentioned in Chapter 4.  Instead, after setting the scene of the sack, he provides a list the events with minimal expansion. Here I have used the same method that I outlined for dividing the texts of Apollodorus and John Tzetzes into episodes. Both Proclus and Apollodorus quickly move through the fate of several main characters.

The first episode of this poem is the Trojan reaction to the Horse. Proclus explains the opposing view points: that it should be destroyed and or that it should be ushered into the city. However, he does not attribute any opinion to specific characters. For this expanded element, one much turn to Apollodorus. Both texts also specify that the Horse is already inside the city walls when the Trojans meet to decide on a course of action. In Apollodorus, it is παρὰ τοῖς Πριάμου βασιλείοις στήσαντες, and Proclus ends his previous summary by noting that it is brought into the city.  Apollodorus' love of prophecies returns when he adds the elements of the protestations of Kassandra and Laocoon. Both sources have the Trojans τί  χρὴ ποιεῖν, and both retellings list the options as burning it or hurling it off a clift. In Apollodorus,  Kassandra, as is her tragic fate, is exactly correct when she λεγούσης ἔνοπλον ἐν αὐτῷ δύναμιν εἶναι[Apollod. Epit. 5.17]. Laocoon, a priest of Apollo, confirms her claim, but later pays for it dearly. Proclus says that two serpents appear while the Trojans are celebrating their supposed victory and devour one of his sons. Apollodorus alters this element not only by having both sons die, but also by having the serprents be sent by Apollo[Apollod. Epit. 5.18]. Both of these accounts conflict with Virgil, who offers a retelling with a very different nature and purpose, where Loacoon perishes as well with his sons[Virgil Aen. 2.201] The Tabula does not depict this episode as told by Proclus or Apollodorus, perhaps because there is not enough action to make it recognizable. Figures standing around the Horse do not carry enough meaning themselves to denote this episode. However, although it is included at the end of the *Little Iliad*,  the depiction of Kassandra is significant enough to stand for this episode. Lastly, Proclus uniquely adds that οἱ περὶ τὸν Αἰνείαν ὑπεξῆλθον εἰς τὴν Ί̈δην[Iliupersis.5], due to such an inauspicious sign. This conflicts with Apollodorus and the Tabula, which both have the future founder of Rome fleeing during the violence of the sack. 

Apollodorus then relates the episode the exit from the Horse, and the initial violence. He sets the scene for the infamous plan by saying ὡς δὲ ἐγένετο νὺξ καὶ πάντας ὕπνος κατεῖχεν[Apollod. Epit. 5.19]. Sinon gives the signal to the Greek troops hiding behind Tenedos in both textual retellings. Apollodorus expands this element slightly to say that did this ἀπὸ τοῦ Ἀχιλλέως τάφου πυρσὸν ἧπτεν[Apollod. Epit. 5.19], rather than merely τοὺς πυρσοὺς ἀνίσχει as in Proclus[Iliupersis.6]. The Greeks exit the Horse without any issues in Proclus, but this is not the case in Apollodorus. Echoing *Odyssey* 4.274-4.289, he writes that Helen taunted the Greek commanders by imitating the voices of their wives. Anticlus would have revealed their trick, had not Odysseus silenced him. Further, Echion is the first Greek to fall inside of Troy, as he plummets to his death upon exiting the horse. The rest of the Greeks, as seems logical, descended by means of a rope[Servius on Virgil Aen. 2.150 says that the Horse was 120 feet tall, as found in West LOEB 147. This would no doubt explain the death of Echion if he neglected to use a rope to descend.]. This element does not figure in any other retelling. The Tabula shows the Greeks exiting the Horse and then being directly involved in the fighting[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.531,0.232,0.234,0.1707]. This does not necessarily mean that they fought the Trojans the first moment that they exited the Horse, but rather is a narrative device used by the artist of the Tabula to show the action of the sack.

Once out of the Horse, the Greeks commanders open the gates and the troops descend on the city. The remainder of this epic, with the exception of the rape of Kassandra by the Locrian Ajax, cannot be separated into individual episodes due to the rapid narrative used by the various retellings. The action that figures in the Tabula can help demarcate episodes, but only to a certain extent. 

Proclus opens up his account of the destruction by writing καὶ πολλοὺς ἀνελόντες τὴν πόλιν κατὰ κράτος λαμβάνουσι[Iliupersis.7]. This general fighting is shown in the Tabula[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.121,0.128,0.746,0.264], where the absence of captions makes it difficult to assign names or significant to many figures. Proclus and Apollodorus begin with the same event, namely the death of Priam at the hands of Neoptolemos. Both agree with almost identical language that he died at the temple of Zeus. Apollodorus writes Νεοπτόλεμος μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ ἑρκείου  Διὸς βωμοῦ καταφεύγοντα Πρίαμον ἀνεῖλεν[Apollod. Epit. 5,21], and Proclus has Νεοπτόλεμος μὲν ἀποκτείνει Πριάμον Πρίαμον ἐπι τὸν τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ ερκείου βωμὸν καταφυγόντα[Iliupersis.8]. The death of Priam is shown in the second group of figures in the Tabula, where it is paired with Neoptolemos' seizure of Hecuba.[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.297,0.3787,0.372,0.2213] This last element in the Tabula appears later in the textual retellings.

Then, Apollodorus names two Trojans who escaped the destruction. Glaucus, the son of Antenor, flees with his life after being spared by Odysseus and Menelaus. It is fortunate that these are the two Greeks who find him, as his father spared their lives during their early embassy to Troy[see my chapter 5 on the events that happen before the *Iliad* for the embassy to Troy.] Next, Apollodorus mentions the familiar story of the flight of Aeneas with his father[compare Virgil Aen. 2.699 and following]. He adds that the Greeks choose to spare him  διὰ τὴν εὐσέβειαν[Apollod. Epit. 5.21]. The symbols of his εὐσέβειαν or fides are shown in the Tabula, namely his father and the household gods [urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.108,0.528,0.325,0.1813 and urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.379,0.5453,0.233,0.284]. In addition to leaving with his father and son, the captions on the Tabula show Hermes escorting Aeneas' party through the gates of Troy. This addition of Hermes is unknown in all other retellings. The Tabula expands the episode of Aeneas' flight further with an image of him and his company boarding a ship[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_1@0.365,0.6293,0.258,0.22]. Next, both textual sources have Menelaus kill Deiphobos and take Helen back to the ships. Again, their language is very similar, with Proclus writing ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς κατάγει[Iliupersis.9] and Apollodorus writing ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς ἄγει[Apollod. Epit. 5.22]. Thanks to the survival of a caption that reads ιερον αφροδιτης[iliupersis_1.2], the figures of a Greek warrior and a nearly unclothed woman are able to be identified as Menelaus and Helen[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.571,0.38,0.357,0.2147]. However, the death of Deiphobos does not appear in on the Tabula. The essential element here is the retrieval of Helen, not the death of her newest husband, though the two logically go hand in hand. 

The next event is expanded enough in all three retellings that I have analyzed to establish it confidently as its own episode. After these deaths, escapes, and recaptures, comes the rape of Kassandra. Proclus does not mention the violation explicitly, but rather says that Ajax πρὸς βίαν ἀποσπῶν[Iliupersis.10]. Here again we see him tempering the negative actions of the heroes. Both Apollodorus and Proclus reference the sacred statue of Athena. In Proclus, the Trojan priestess drags off the τὸ τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς ξόανον with her, and in Apollodorus, she is seen περιπεπλεγμένην τῷ ξοάνῳ τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς[Apollod. Epit. 5.22]. Apollodorus adds the folk story that this is why the statue looks to heaven, out of its shame caused by the rape. The depiction of this episode on the Tabula matches Apollodorus closely, as the figure label as Ajax[iliupersis_1.1] is seen dragging a woman who is presumably Kassandra from a temple[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.377,0.1413,0.261,0.156]. Proclus even further expands the episode by showing the Greeks' anger at Ajax for violating the temple, and their wish to stone him. However, he takes shelter in the very temple which he has just desecrated, and thereby saves himself. But Athena, still angered at his offense, devises ruin for the Greeks upon the sea[T.W. Allen moves this last detail is moved to the end of the summary in his edition, but I have maintained its narrative position here, as it reflects its location in the Venetus A, the only source for this summary.] This element appears at the very end of Apollodorus' section concerning the sack of Troy[Apollod. Epit. 5.23]. He writes that, just as they are about to leave, Kalchas stops them out of fear of Athena's wrath. Then, just as in Proclus, Ajax seeks refuge in Athena's temple, in order to avoid being killed. 

After this episode, Proclus brings his summary of the epic to a close with another rapid succession of Trojan fates. Apollodorus says that the Greeks set first to the city at this point, while Proclus reserves this act for the every end of his summary[compare Apollod. Epit. 5.23 and Iliupersis.15]. Contrary to his usually more mild nature, Proclus assigns the death of Astyanax directly to Odysseus[Iliupersis.12]. Apollodorus is vague about who murders the child of Hector, but does specify that Ἀστυάνακτα ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων ἔρριψαν[Apolld. Epit. 5.23]. Before saying that the Greeks divide up the rest of the spoils, the only other war prize that Proclus names is Andromache, who is given to Neoptolemos. Apollodours, as usual, expands this list more by writing λαμβάνει δὲ Ἀγαμέμνων μὲν κατ᾽ ἐξαίρετον Κασάνδραν, Νεοπτόλεμος δὲ Ἀνδρομάχην, Ὀδυσσεὺς δὲ Ἑκάβην. Then he goes on to provide an alternate tradition where Helenus, perhaps due to his prophetic service to the Greeks, receives the Trojan queen, and until she turns into a dog and later dies. The Tabula has a scene in which the Greek herald Talthybius visits Andromache, Helenus[iliupersis.7 and iliupersis.8, Helenus appears named,  as do the two women, through he does not grammatically fall under the overall title of Τρῳάδες], and a dejected Kassandra[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_1@0.032,0.5253,0.148,0.212]. Lastly, Apollodorus uniquely adds that Laodice, the loveliest daughter of Priam[see Iliad 2.123 and 6.252], was swallowed up by the earth. 

Proclus then writes that the sons of Thesus, Demophon and Acamas, recover their grandmother Aethra[see my chapter 5 on the events before the *Iliad* for her journey to Troy with Helen]. This was their sole purpose of joining the Greek campaign, and appears to be an essential part of the sack, as it appears in all three retellings. This passage appears earlier in Apollodorus, when he gives his first list of Trojan fates[Apollod. Epit. 5.22]. He explains their late apperance in his narrative by saying that καὶ γὰρ τούτους λέγουσιν εἰς Τροίαν ἐλθεῖν ὕστερον. Due to some poorly preserved, but still legible captions on the Tabula, one can see this episode depicted near the flight on Aeneas[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_16@0.577,0.5493,0.293,0.1627]. The prevalence of these figures across the various retellings, even in its contracted form, supports its importance. 

To end his summary, Proclus writes that the Greeks raze the city, and slaughter Polyxena on the tomb of Achilles. While this action appears earlier in Apollodorus[Apollod. Epit. 5.23], before the final allotment of spoils, it does take place after the burning of the city in this retelling as well. It is given a prime location on the Tabula, appearing almost in the center of the stone[urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_1@0.355,0.54,0.261,0.148]. While this does not make it the focal point of this complex document, it does allow the episode to stand out among the others. The accompanying caption lists Νεοπτόλεμος, Πολυξένη, Ὀδυσσεύς, Κάλχας, and provides Ἀχιλλέως σῆμα as the location[iliupersis.11]. Proclus gives a generic third person plural verb for the scarifice, again not wanting to name names. However, Apollodorus also follows suit, and does not provide any more expansion. Another scene, only included on the Tabula, shows Odysseus talking to Helenus, who is accompanied by Hecuba, Andromache, and Polyxena. [urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_1@0.164,0.5293,0.146,0.1587 for the image, and iliupersis.9 for the captions] An episode with these characters does not appear in the other retellings. It is possible that it is linked to the sacrifice of Polyxena, due to her presence, and would explain Odysseus' role in the affair. Neoptolemos is present due to the fact that the sacrifice is being made on his father's tomb. Kalchas most likely appears due to a prophecy connection, possibly dealing with the spirit of Achilles. With this, Proclus concludes his retelling of the *Iliupersis*. 

[1]: Aithiopis.1

[2]: Apollod. Epit. 5.1

[3]: Little Iliad.3

[4]: urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.006,0.3573,0.13,0.108

[5]: Petrain reads κης for Podacres in a caption before the first visible episode, which would show his death at her hands, suggesting her skill in battle

[6]: West 140

[7]: Apolld. Epit. 5.2

[8]: urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.107,0.368,0.158,0.0933

[9]: Aithiopis.3

[10]: Apollod. Epit. 5.1

[11]: Aithiopis.5

[12]: Apollod. Epit. 5.3

[13]: West 145

[14]: urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.233,0.3667,0.177,0.1

[15]: urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.Capitoline_8@0.396,0.368,0.245,0.1107

[16]: Apollod. Epit. 5.3

[17]: Iliad 6.230-6.236

[18]: 

[19]: 

[20]: 

[21]: 

[22]: 

[23]: 

[24]: 

[25]: 

[26]: 

[27]: 

[28]: 

[29]: 

[30]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 

[1]: 


