#Chapter 2: The Sources of the Epic Cycle#

This thesis is by no means an exhaustive analysis of the Epic Cycle. With the exception of the Tabula Capitolina, I have restricted myself to literary sources. While it is often complicated to link ancient artwork directly to these epics, there are numerous vase paintings that depict Cyclic episodes [see Davies for the difficulties in dating ktl]. I have worked exclusively with the Tabula Capitolina due to its state of preservation as well as time constraints. My research also does not make use of all of the literary sources. It would have been difficult to extrapolate whole episodes based off of testimonia from other authors[see West for a list of testimonia]. The Homeric scholia alone provide a great deal of insight into the Cycle. The sources that I did choose to work with were chosen for a variety of reasons, such as their authoritative nature or the availability of open access to primary sources documents. 

##Proclus##

The Proclus summaries are one of the most essential sources of what is known about the Epic Cycle. Each summary lists the title of the epic, a proposed author, the number of books, as well as the work's sequence   in the Cycle. In their original state, they were part of his work entitled the *Chrestomathy*. Beyond these summaries, our knowledge of this larger work comes from its entry in the *Bibliotheca* of Photius. During the ninth century, Photius was the patriarch of Constantinople. This work is a collection of summaries of book that he had read. The entry for Proclus' *Chrestomathy* says that this work contained biographies of the great epic poets, an account of the Epic Cycle, and a discussion of the *Cypria*[West and Monro]. There is little evidence with which to identify which Proclus is meant here. While he previously had been thought to be the fifth century Neoplatonist, scholars today reject that notion. The most one can deduce is that he may be from the second century(Monoro article, West). Regardless of the difficulties in identifying him, the summaries are invaluable to studying the Epic Cycle. 

These summaries provide a chronological retelling of the Cyclic events not covered in the surviving Homeric epics. Proclus does not include alternate mythological traditions, but rather writes a continuous narrative.  His summaries span the whole Epic Cycle, covering the *Cypria*, *Aithiopis*, *Iliasparva*, *Iliupersis*, and the *Telegonia*. He omits the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*, due to their popularity and prevalence at his time. There was no need to retells these two epics, as they were readily accessible and well known at whatever time when Proclus was writing. 

The only manuscript source for these summaries, as well as a *Life of Homer* also taken from the *Chrestomathy*, is the Marciana 454 manuscript known as the Venetus A. It is a tenth century deluxe edition of the *Iliad* with extensive scholia which date back to the Library of Alexandria. The Proclus' summaries and the *Life* appear at the front of the codex, except for the summary of the *Cypria*, which is lost. Furthermore, these initial folios are not in their original state or order. A number of blank folios have been sewed to these loose folios when the codex was rebound, which disrupted the standard quaternion layout at this part of the manuscript[See Monro for a reconstruction of the original layout with the Cypria]. 

Although lost from the Venetus A, the summary of the *Cypria* is preserved in four?CHECK manuscripts. It is also the only Proclus summary that appears outside of the Venetus A. The edition of this summary was done from the Escorial 513 Omega 1.12. The Omega 1.12 is an eleventh century manuscript of the *Iliad* with scholia, as well as the *Batrachomyomachia*. Open access to digital photography of both the Omega 1.12 and the Venetus A is available at the Homer Multitext website.  

##Apollodorus##

The *Library* of Apollodorus is a vast compilation of mythological stories. The modern editions of this text start with a theogony and continues until the death of Odysseus. The three book divisions, with the added epitome, does not reflect any similar manuscript divisions. However, a comparison with the Homeric scholia that are cite H HISTORIA PARA..... [Diller 297] does appear to support the division of this work into three books. The epitome is complied from two manuscripts GIVE MORE HERE[cite Diller]. 

Apollodorus provides his reader with a complete explanation of a wide range of Greek mythology. He lists extensive genealogies, often presenting alternative lineages. In addition, he also incorporates alternate events into his text[give example] as well as occasionally citing authors[give example]. It is in the epitome that Apollodorus gives his retelling of the Epic Cycle. The continuous and completeness of this passage makes it an ideal comparison for other retellings. Much like Proclus' summaries, Apollodorus starts his retelling section with the judgment of Paris, and ends with Telegonus' accidental murder of his father Odysseus. However, Apollodorus includes the events found in the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey*. 

Certain passages that appear outside of this retelling section in the modern edition of the *Library* reference characters from the Cycle. For example, the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, the birth and invulnerability of Achilles, and the Greek suitors of Helen all appear outside of the narrative bounds of Apollodorus' Cyclic retelling. The fact that these events are outside of what appears to be the standard Epic Cycle passages could suggest that these events were not found in the Cycle. However, the infrequency with which Apollodorus cites his sources makes it difficult to draw any concrete conclusions about where he feels the Cycle began. It is possible that these stories, as many are in the Homeric epics, were not part of the main plot of the Cyclic poems, but were rather related in a digression[cite West when he talks about the birth of Helen?]. 

##John Tzetzes##

John Tzetzes, the twelfth century Byzantine scholar wrote a number of works both in prose and in poetry. The Homeric epics, as well as the wider tradition of Greek mythology were favorite topics of his. In addition to his fairly well known and studied *Antehomerica*, *Homerica*, and *Posthomerica*, he also wrote a work on *Homeric Allegories*. This book was dedicated to the Bavarian princess who would become Empress Irene upon marrying the Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus. Tzetzes intended his work to serve as an introduction to Greek culture for the new foreign ruler[cite allegories book]. 

The prolegomena to the *Homeric Allegories* runs for 1214 lines in political verse. Tzetzes dedicates just over a thousand of these lines to a retelling of the events that precede the *Iliad*. After providing a brief life of Homer, he instructs his reader to learn ὑποθισιν τῆς ὀλης Ἰ̈λιάδος. Like the aforementioned retellings, Tetzes too beings with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, and then concludes where the *Iliad* beings, with the anger of Achilles. The poetic nature, as well as its length, make this retelling of particular interest. Tzetzes is not constrained by the size of his work, and is consequently free to expand or contract episodes as he pleases. While Proclus and the hypothesis of events before the *Iliad* must be brief by necessity, the prolegomena is meant to be a thorough introduction to the *Iliad*. While removed by several centuries from the other works that I have worked with in this thesis, this retelling is notable because it shows how a highly learned scholar would have dealt with a complex epic such as the *Cypria*. My edition of the prolegomena was done from open access photography of the BNF 2705 manuscript from the Bibliothèque nationale de France website. 

##Hypothesis##

The BNF 2706 manuscript contains a hypothesis of the events before the *Iliad*. It is found at the begining of the codex, before arguments and scholia to the *Iliad*. The bulk of this manuscript has been attributed to Aristarchus of Samothrace, a prominment Homeric scholar and librarian at Alexandria[cite Dickey]. The presence of this potentially Aristarchean material gives authority to the hypothesis. In contrast to the *Homeric Allegories*, the hypothesis found in the BNF 2706 is worthy of interest for its brevity. This retellings is even shorter than that of Proclus, and therefore provides an insight into the most essential episodes. The author of the hypothesis had to be highly selective when choosing what to expand and contract, and even what to omit entirely. The narrative bounds of this hypothesis largely match that of the other retellings, again beginning with the wedding of Peleus and Thetis and ending just before the start of the *Iliad*. Just as with the manuscript of John Tzetzes, my edition was done from open access photography of this manuscript from the Bibliothèque nationale de France website. 


##Tabula Capitolina##

The Tabula Capitolina (1A) is one of twenty-two stone tablets that depict scenes from the Epic Cycle known as the Tabulae Iliacae[note on other scenes]. This tabula in particular shows scenes from the *Iliad*, the *Aethiopis*, the *Iliasparva* and the *Iliupersis*. Additionally, there is a prose summary of the *Iliad* engraved on a stele. As mentioned in the Introduction, the tabula is now damaged. The original stone would have been about 42cm by 25cm, but is not 30cm by 25cm [Squire article 70]. In the damage, scenes from *Iliad* 2 through 12 and the stele with the summary for books 1 through 7 were lost. I have focused exclusively on this tabula because it is one of the best preserved and more complex out of the Tabulae Iliacae. It covers four different epics, and mixes both visual and textual retellings. Books 13 through 24 are present both in the textual summary as well as the carved figures. This double retelling combined in one document is a unique opportunity to look at retellings across different media.

The scholarship on the Tabulae Iliacae has been divided on the subject of their importance. Previously, they were thought to be low class carvings for adult education due to some inconsistencies between the stone and the *Iliad* [cite Horsfall]. However, more recent scholars have shown that these highly complex and allusive documents are greatly worthy of interest[Squire and Petrain]. NEED MORE HERE. My edition of the Tabula Capitolina was done from open access photography taken by Rebecca Finnigan and Nikolas Churik. Additionally, Drew Virtue digitally altered a number of these photographs, in order to make the texts clearer. The drawing of this tabula done by Jahn was also invaluable to the study of this document[cite Jahn].

**NOT done, need to add more scholarship**
