{>>Need to add citations of images for specific observations. *Numbers in the text show where to add citations, once the images become citeable*<<} 

#Intro#

The Tabula Capitolina depicts a broad range of scenes from the Epic Cycle. The central block shows events from the *Iliupersis*. Scenes from *Iliad* 1 fill the top row of the stone, and carvings of the *Aethiopis* and the *Little Iliad* run along the bottom. The right side of the Tabula shows the events of *Iliad* 13 through 24. This layout strongly suggests that scenes from *Iliad* 2 through 12 would have filled the left hand side in the stones original condition.

#Iliupersis#

The focal image is the *Iliupersis*, which uses the city of Troy as its background. The divisions between the episodes stem from their spatial relation to the citadel. The first episode is bounded by the inner courtyard for the temple of Athena. 1. Here, fighting has broken out as the Greeks descend from the Horse. Most notably, Locrian Ajax is dragging Cassandra from the safety of the temple. The artist has clearly grouped these figures together by surrounding them with the set of temple walls.  

Beneath the temple of Athena, another episode is clearly demarcated by the courtyard of the temple of Zeus or the palace of Priam. 2. Neoptolemos is about to slay Priam, while another Greek attempts to drag away Hecuba. A male and female figure lie on the ground, potentially the children of the Trojan king and queen. Just as above, these figures are meant to be grouped together due to their close physical relation. 

The four pairs of figures outside of these courtyards, one on either side of both sidewalls, blur the episodic distinctions. 3. The lack of visible captions for three of them have lead scholars to label these pairs simply as nameless fighters. They do not appear to fit in with the two episodes occurring inside of the courtyards, but perhaps are meant to fill out the scene visually. The fourth pair does not have a label identifying them by name, but rather the nearby structure bears the inscription ΙΕΡΟΝ ΑΦΡΟΔΙΤΗΣ. 4.  This strongly support the theory that the man and woman in front of the temple are Menelaus and Helen. Two essential figures such as these raise questions about the roles of the other three pairs. Menelaus and Helen could have simply been confused for another pair, if it were not for the inscription that puts them in greater context. 

The final scenes within the citadel are grouped in three different episodes. On the right, Demophon and Acamas lead their grandmother Aethra out of the city, while three Trojan figures flank their escape. 5. The episode on the left depicts Aeneas receiving the household gods from a priest, again alongside three other figures, this time two warriors and a woman. 6. This episode is distinct from the middle episode, not only because of the reappearance of Aeneas, but because it takes place under the Scaean gate. 7. The architecture of the gate serves to separate these three episodes. The action is divided on either side and in between its arches. Here, Aeneas flees the city, accompanied by his family and Hermes. 

Beneath the citadel, four other episodes fill the remainder of the space devoted to the *Iliupersis*. Each episode is clustered around a central object. The tomb of Hector serves as the main object for the scene on the left. However, there are two episodes around this one object. 8 and 9. In the first, a group of Trojans gather along one wall of the tomb, mourning Hector. The inscriptions identify the characters as Andromache, Cassandra, Talthybius, and Helenus. The second scene depicted along the other wall must be a separate episode, due to the duplication of certain characters and the addition of new ones. Here Odysseus speaks with Helenus while Andromache, Hecuba, and Polyxena sit along side of him. The repeated inscriptions bearing the names of Andromache and Helenus show that this episode must be taken separately from the other episode around the tomb of Hector. 10 and 11. 

The episode on the right takes place around the tomb of Achilles, and is spatial separate from the other scenes in this lower section of the portion of the stone dedicated to the *Iliupersis*. 12. Neoptolemos, accompanied by a page, slaughters Polyxena in the company of Odysseus and Chalchas. The placement of this episode on the same level as the episodes around Hector's tomb show that they both take place on the plains of Tory. 

The last episode in the *Iliupersis* is not only spatially separate from the rest of the scenes below the Trojan citadel, but also marked off with a carved line. This marking separates the scenes on the Trojan plain from this scene on the shore. 13. Here Aeneas boards a ship, accompanied by his pilot Misenus and his father carrying the household gods. 

#Aethiopis#

Below the scenes of the *Iliupersis* are two rows of carvings that depict scenes from the *Aethiopis* and the *Little Iliad*. 14. Both rows are incomplete from the damage done to the stone. The break appears to align with the start of a new episode in the row that depicts the *Aethiopis*. The seven episodes within the scenes in this row are mainly separated by architectural structures. These episodes provide examples of the three different ways in which the artist divides his scenes. The first two episodes and the last are divided in such a way that the architectural structure on the right of the figures is meant to be a part of the scene. 15. 16. The next two scenes are separated by the gates of Troy, which is placed in the middle of these episodes. 17. Here, the gates can be taken with both episodes. The second to last episode in this row has Thetis and the Muses mourning Achilles. The artist depicts them grouped around his tomb, as in indication to take all three figures together. 18. These routine divisions cover six of the seven episodes in this row. However, none of these dividers are present between the fourth and fifth episodes. 19. The reader must us the repetition of the name of Achilles in the inscriptions in order to draw their own divisions. Additionally, the reader's knowledge of the Epic Cycle would place the figure of Odysseus in the latter episode, not the former. {++++}Where to place  Achilles' body?{++++}

#Little Iliad#

The row of scenes from the *Little Iliad* begins with a partial episode, due to the damage done to the stone. 20. Paris lays mortally wounded, but his enemy, Philoctetes, is no longer visible. In this row, the artist employs similar techniques to distinguish the episodes within his narrative. The first full episode likely depicts Priam and the Mysian Eurypylus grouped around an altar. 21. The second and third complete episodes are separated by the gates of Troy, much like the death of Memnon and the death of Achilles in the row above. 22. 23. These scenes show the death of Eurypylus by Neoptolemos outside the city and the raid of the Palladium within. The appearance of the Trojan Horse can be taken two ways: that it marks the division between the raid of the Palladium and the Trojan procession, or that it is meant to assume the reader's knowledge of the Cycle in order to make the division on their own. If we assume the second interpretation, its presence reminds the reader that Odysseus and Diomedes brought back the Palladium before entering the Horse. The Trojan Horse then becomes part of the next episode, where it is being led in procession by the Trojan women and Phrygians. 25. Because the figure at the front of the procession and Priam stand with their backs to one another, the episode of the Horse does not include Priam and Sinon. 26. It is difficult to see whether the artist meant for there to be a distinction between the episode of Priam and Sinon and that of Cassandra and her attendant. There is no structure between them, and the two pairs are, while perhaps not intentionally, facing one another. Yet, there is enough space between the pairs to suggest that they may be separate episodes. Turning to the reader's knowledge of the Cycle does not make this matter much clearer. There is significant debate and conflicting evidence as to where the *Little Iliad* ended and the following *Iliupersis* began. The artist's depiction of the *Iliupersis* clearly shows that the Greeks exited the Horse within the narrative bounds of that epic. Yet, the testimonia of these two epics do not agree on when the Greeks left the Horse, and more importantly here the protestation of Cassandra. Due to Cassandra's presence in the depictions of the *Little Iliad*, it would seem that  the artist  intends for this episode to be here. Yet, the question of whether it belongs with the Priam and Sinon episode would diminish its importance, and thus make it possible for an episode solely devoted to Cassandra's protestation to be found at the very beginning of the *Iliupersis*, as Proclus has it. {++++}need to clean that argument up. not sure if it should go here or later in a discussion of episodes that do not align across the sources{++++}


#Iliad 1#

The row about the central portion of the tabula depicts scenes from *Iliad 1*. 27. The carvings are largely intact, except for an additional episode at the start that has been destroyed. With seven of the eight episodes shown, the space dedicated to depicting this book is roughly double the space that is dedicated to retelling the other books of the *Iliad*. Due to their close proximity, it may seem that the first two episodes are in fact one. 28. However, the duplication of Chryses both bringing the ransom for his daughter and then praying at the temple of Apollo makes these two distinct episodes. The temple provides a separation between the episode of the plague. 29. It is clear that the plague and the meeting of the Greek chiefs are independent episodes, but it is not clear where Chalcas belongs. He is addressing the council of the Greeks, and therefore could easily be part of that episode, as Petrain has him. His caption is certainly close enough to the names of the other Greeks. Schreiber has an episode that consists solely of the seer. Yet, the fact that Chalcas is facing the plague, and conversely that his back is turned on the Greeks, is an argument for viewing the plague and the seer as one episode. 30. While he is speaking to the Greek leaders, the focus of his speech is the plague, which he seems to be nearly interacting with. {++++}maybe not the case, if the modern drawings are not as accurate, depending on where his face is pointing{++++} The council of the Greeks, including Athena pulling back Achilles, is depicted as one episode do to the figures being clustered around Agamemnon. Likewise, the group of animals after it start a new episode where Odysseus leads the sacrifice to the temple of Apollo. 31. The artist, as he often does, then separates this episode from the supplication of Zeus by Thetis with the structure of the temple. 



#Overall Layout#

_____________________________________
The upper row of carvings that depict scenes from {++++}Iliad 1{++++} are similarly divided using structural barriers. Additionally, {==characters with their backs==}{>>use 'their' as a plural pronoun<<} turned to another group clearly shows the boundary of an episode. The right-hand side of the table has scenes from Iliad 13-24. Each book is in a separate block, often with the corresponding book letter. When different episodes appear within the depiction of one book, the separation is again generally shown by having non-linked characters stand back to back. Structural divisions are less common, though not entirely absent. In this section, the captions are also employed to show groupings. Names that are close together correspond to characters that appear in the same episode.
The depictions of the Aethiopis and the Little Iliad are found along the bottom left edge of the table. These carvings make use of all three episode markers. Characters within the same episode are named, often {++with vertical labels}{--in a vertical manner--}. 
